---
title: "Netstats Origin"
date: "2025-07-25"
author: "Spencer Dooley"
description: ""
slug: "netstats-first-article"
image_url: "/static/article_thumbs/netstats-preview-final.jpg"
---

I understand it will sound wrong for me to say this, being too young to
have experienced many eras of basketball, but I already feel as if I
grew up in the golden era of basketball. The early 2010's had it all in
the NBA world. Lebron James, the megastar loathed for not winning where
he was supposed to win. The enigmatic Kobe Bryant's career winding down.
The imminent rise of the original OKC big three. The aging wonders in
San Antonio, who I was too young to appreciate at the time. As a Knicks
fan, I must include Carmelo Anthony making the Knicks watchable for a
brief period - though watching Melo go on a scoring run was one of the
more beautiful things to witness on a basketball court. And of course, a
couple years into this era, the emergence of the Splash Bros in the Bay.

This era marked a time in the NBA where the skill level began to
explode. The dynamic, do-it-all, wings with size, speed, and unbridled
basketball skill. The guards who began to display shooting prowess,
which would make many of those who grew up in an era without the
three-point line consider this style of basketball black-magic. Before
this time in basketball, the skill level league-wide allowed tactics to
be more influential than in today's game. Basketball was played in a way
where there needed to be a master tactician at the helm. There were more
organized offenses and distinct offensive styles throughout the league
that became representative of who that coach was.

In the early 2010's the carefully implemented offensive schemes were
blessed with some of the greatest offensive talents the NBA has ever
seen. It was the perfect time in the NBA.

I have always lived and breathed basketball and as an
analytically-minded person, have had a natural draw to basketball
analytics. When I attended school for data science, I found myself with
the tools to actually produce analysis about whatever basketball
question I had. **Netstats** is the culmination of a multitude of past
basketball-themed data science work I've done, showcased in a web app.

Most basketball analytics work (and sports analytics work in general)
today is about predicting player and team performance down to the most
granular degree. A fool\'s errand in my opinion, and one that is driven
by the explosion of the sports betting industry as everyone has become
obsessed with the probability of player X getting 20+ points, 12+
rebounds, and 6+ assists - but it's all a wash if he makes more than 5
threes. What I find more interesting is examining patterns in the NBA
and within specific teams and, in a somewhat abstract way, quantifying a
player's "role". While these insights may not lead anyone to an
increased virtual wallet in their sportsbook of choice, they may help
teams and fans *understand* teams and players with a different lens.

So why did I open with an ode to the 2010's NBA? The goal of
**netstats** is to visualize team dynamics from a stylistic perspective.
I loved the style of basketball in the early 2010's and, since that
could be just my childhood rose-colored glasses doing the talking, I
want to begin tracking offensive styles and team dynamics over time. The
game of basketball is ever-evolving and as fans, we should be able to
understand and visualize that.

Networks lie at the core of **netstats**. Networks where nodes represent
players, and edges, the pass frequency between those players. What
players orchestrate the flow of the ball? Which players stop the flow of
the ball? Do teams, or certain players, pass more frequently to an
inefficient scorer than the efficient one? What players are the
offensive engines for their teams? These are all questions I'm trying to
give insight to with **netstats**. There are some network-specific
metrics used throughout this app. You do not need to be an expert in
network science to understand what these metrics imply about players and
teams and hopefully you'll find the included definitions and
explanations helpful.

Exploring **netstats** should be fun and fulfilling as a basketball
fan - if there are metrics you think of related to this data, other
features you want to see, or maybe even something you found interesting
you want posted in this article section, please reach out. I'd love to
collaborate on it.
